JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: The
White House
refuses to say whether it
records conversations,
as President Trump keeps up his
battle with
fired FBI Director James Comey
by warning
him not to talk.
Then: one-on-one with
Condoleezza Rice.
I sit down with the former
secretary of state
to discuss the Russia
investigation, democracy
and the Trump White House.
CONDOLEEZZA RICE, Former U.S.
Secretary of
State: Judy, I worry that this
is starting
to erode people's confidence in
our institutions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus: In a
reversal of Obama-era
policies, Attorney General Jeff
Sessions orders
federal prosecutors to pursue
harsher sentences
on drug offenses, including
mandatory minimum
time in prison.
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and Ramesh Ponnuru
are here to
analyze a watershed week for the
Trump administration.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We're 113 days
into the Trump
presidency, with more than 1,300
left until
the next Inauguration Day.
At times, it's felt like a
whirlwind, and
this week may have brought the
most tumultuous
yet.
Our Lisa Desjardins brings us up
to speed.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, Deputy
White House
Press Secretary: And now I will
take your
questions.
LISA DESJARDINS: A roller-coast
week for the
White House ended with more
turbulence and
questions.
QUESTION: Does he think it's
appropriate to
threaten someone like Mr. Comey?
LISA DESJARDINS: After reports
that allies
of fired FBI Director James
Comey insist he
never told President Trump that
he wasn't
under investigation, the
opposite of the president's
version.
This morning, a tweeting
President Trump fired
out: "Comey better hope that
there are no
tapes of our conversations."
At the White House, reporters
asked Press
Secretary Sean Spicer if that
was meant as
a message.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
That is not a threat.
He's simply stated a fact.
LISA DESJARDINS: Asked
repeatedly if there
are recording devices in the
Oval Office,
Spicer refused to answer.
SEAN SPICER: The president has
nothing further
to add on that.
LISA DESJARDINS: The back and
forth and back
again this week has been
dizzying.
It may clear things up to look
at the two
core issues: Why was Director
Comey fired,
and when was that decision made?
First, why -- here's what the
president said
yesterday to NBC News.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
When I decided to just do it, I
said to myself,
I said, you know, this Russia
thing with Trump
and Russia is a made-up story.
It's an excuse by the Democrats
for having
lost an election that they
should have won.
LISA DESJARDINS: But just one
day earlier,
Wednesday, Vice President Pence
told reporters
the issues were a lack of
confidence and recommendations
from the Justice Department.
MIKE PENCE, Vice President of
the United States:
The American people have to have
confidence
in the Federal Bureau of
Investigation.
And because of the actions that
the deputy
attorney general outlined to the
president
that were endorsed and agreed
with by the
attorney general, the president
made the right
decision at the right time.
LISA DESJARDINS: Pence was
referencing Deputy
Attorney General Rod Rosenstein.
His letter released Tuesday
centered on charges
that Comey mishandled the
Clinton investigation,
nothing about Russia.
The other rationale for Comey's
firing -- it
was in the president's letter to
Comey -- restoring
trust and confidence in the FBI,
but that
was directly countered yesterday
by acting
FBI Chief Andrew McCabe.
ANDREW MCCABE, Acting FBI
Director: I can
tell you also that Director
Comey enjoyed
broad support within the FBI and
still does
to this day.
LISA DESJARDINS: At different
times, the White
House pointed to three different
reasons for
the Comey firing.
There were also varying
descriptions of when
and how that decision was made.
Here's the president in
yesterday's NBC interview.
DONALD TRUMP: I was going to
fire Comey, my
decision.
I was going to fire, regardless
of recommendation.
LISA DESJARDINS: That is at odds
with the
previous two days of staff
statements.
First, Press Secretary Spicer
speaking off-camera
minutes after the Comey firing
told reporters
it was a DOJ decision made by no
one at the
White House.
Wednesday, Vice President Pence
pointed seven
times to the Justice Department
recommendation.
MIKE PENCE: President Trump made
the right
decision at the right time, and
to accept
the recommendation of the deputy
attorney
general and the attorney
general, to ask for
the termination, to support the
termination
of the director of the FBI.
LISA DESJARDINS: Same day, White
House spokeswoman
Sarah Huckabee Sanders implied
the Justice
Department initiated the idea to
fire Comey.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS: He did
have a conversation
with the deputy attorney general
on Monday,
where they had come to him to
express their
concerns.
LISA DESJARDINS: But one day
later, a change:
Sanders said the president had
told her he
decided earlier.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS: I went
off of the
information that I had when I
answered your
question.
I have since had the
conversation with him
right before I walked on today,
and he laid
it out very clearly.
He'd already made that decision.
He'd been thinking about it for
months.
LISA DESJARDINS: Today, the
president tweeted
that he is a very active
president and it's
not possible for his surrogates
to have perfect
accuracy.
Press Secretary Spicer summed up
the Comey
firing this way today:
SEAN SPICER: This is always
going to be the
president's decision, to hire
someone, to
fire someone.
He made a decision, in part
based on the recommendation.
And he is now focused on making
sure that
we will have a replacement at
the FBI.
LISA DESJARDINS: Spicer said
there is no set
timeline for the president to
choose his new
FBI nominee, that it will happen
when he finds
the right person.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we are joined
now from
the White House by correspondent
John Yang.
So, John, a few other threads
that we want
to pursue right now.
One is, the president was asked
earlier this
week by Senator Lindsey Graham
for a letter
to certify that he had -- to
explain what
his connections are to Russia.
Now you have seen that letter.
What does it say?
JOHN YANG: Well, it's from his
tax attorneys.
They have looked at the past 10
years of his
tax returns.
They say they show no
investments in Russia,
show no loan payments, interest
payments to
lenders from Russia.
They say the only income was
about $12 million
in 2013 for the Miss Universe
Pageant and
the proceeds for a $95 million
sale of a Florida
estate to a Russian billionaire.
But tax experts say that this is
not conclusive,
that there are many other ways
that the president
could have dealings with Russia
that are not
included in this letter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, John,
separately, another
issue that's come up in all this
back and
forth that we just heard from
Lisa has to
do with the White House press
briefing, and
the president had something
interesting to
say about that today.
JOHN YANG: He's got an idea of
his own.
He said, instead of a daily
briefing, there
should only be a briefing once
every two weeks,
and that he should give it.
He said he thinks that's a good
idea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we don't know
yet whether
that's going to take place.
Just quickly, John, one other
story I want
to ask you about, the
conflicting reports
about a dinner that the
president had with
James Comey in late January?
JOHN YANG: That's right.
In the interview with NBC's
Lester Holt, the
president said that this was a
dinner that
Mr. Comey had asked for because
he wanted
to keep his job.
Friends of Mr. Comey's say that
that was actually
not the case from his point of
view.
He says that he was asked to
come to the White
House for dinner.
And he also said -- Comey said
that he was
asked several times by the
president whether
he could have his personal
loyalty, whether
the president would have his
personal loyalty.
He said that all he could
promise was that
he would have his honesty.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot to keep
track of.
John Yang, we thank you.
And we will get another view of
the firing
of FBI Director Comey from
former Secretary
of State Condoleezza Rice.
That's right after the news
summary.
In the day's other news: A
massive cyber-attack
struck major institutions and
companies in
more than 70 countries.
The computer systems were
infected with so-called
ransomware that demands money in
exchange
for unlocking data.
The malware is believed to have
exploited
a cyber-hacking tool that was
used by the
National Security Agency that
was broken into
last year.
The United Kingdom was among the
hardest-hit,
forcing its National Health
Service to close
dozens of hospitals and medical
centers.
Paul Davies of Independent
Television News
has this report.
PAUL DAVIES: It is a sinister
development,
the very people we turn to when
we're sick
or injured, themselves under a
concerted and
highly sophisticated attack.
Hospitals and other NHS
organizations only
realizing something was wrong
when someone
appeared to take control of
their vital computer
systems, and then this message
demanding immediate
payment, with the threat that
invaluable records
will be deleted in a week if the
money wasn't
paid.
The result is chaos.
At the hospitals affected,
treatment has been
postponed and ambulances
diverted.
Not all hospitals have been
targeted, but
those that have are widespread.
When Emma Simpson (ph) took her
son Seb (ph)
for a check on his broken toe,
they joined
the thousands of patients
inconvenienced.
WOMAN: They said, I'm really
sorry, but the
computer system is down.
You are going to have to go
away.
We can't have any appointments.
It would be dangerous to do so
because we
can't access any of the files.
PAUL DAVIES: But this local
doctor described
the impact.
DR.
ROB BARNETT, General
Practitioner: We have
become isolated.
We have got no access to the
records.
We have got no access to
electronic prescriptions.
investigations on
patients.
PAUL DAVIES: Latest information
suggests as
many as 40 health trusts may now
be affected.
The message to patients is
hardly reassuring.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two top security
firms said
most of the infected computers
were in Russia.
The Russian Interior Ministry
reported that
roughly 1,000 of its devices
were affected.
It's still not clear who or what
is behind
the cyber-attack.
The U.S. Justice Department has
issued a directive
to federal prosecutors to seek
tougher sentences
for the vast majority of
criminal suspects.
The move is a direct reversal of
the policy
that was put in place under
former President
Obama, which sought to reduce
prison overcrowding.
We will have more on the impact
of the new
sentencing directive a little
later in the
program.
The Trump administration has
unveiled its
new trade deal with China.
As part of the agreement,
Beijing will lift
a 13-year-old ban on U.S. beef
imports.
It will also allow U.S.
shipments of liquefied
natural gas and open the Chinese
market to
U.S. credit card companies.
Chinese banks in turn will be
permitted to
enter the U.S. financial market,
but an exact
date has yet to be set.
U.S. immigration agents have
arrested nearly
1,400 suspected gang members
across the U.S.
in a massive six-week operation.
The Immigration and Customs
Enforcement agency
said fewer than a third of those
arrested
were illegal aliens.
About 1,100 people taken into
custody are
being held on criminal charges.
Last night, the agency's acting
director said
the crackdown is far from over.
THOMAS HOMAN, Acting Director,
U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement: Let me
be clear that
these violent criminal street
gangs are the
biggest threat facing our
communities.
Today, we speak about what we
have done the
past six weeks.
Now, I want to make sure there's
no mistake.
We are not done.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The crackdown is
the largest
anti-gang operation in the
agency's history.
North Korea's parliament sent a
rare letter
to the U.S. Congress today
protesting new
sanctions that the House of
Representatives
passed earlier this month.
They target the North's shipping
industry,
and were in response to its
nuclear program.
North Korea called the measure a
-- quote
-- "heinous act against
humanity," and said
-- quote -- "The U.S. House of
Representatives
should think twice."
It wasn't immediately clear how
the letter
was sent, since the U.S. and
Pyongyang have
no formal diplomatic relations.
Hepatitis C infections have now
nearly tripled
in the U.S.
That's according to a new report
from the
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
Researchers attribute the
increase to the
opioid epidemic and a spike in
heroin use
from the years 2010 to 2015.
The highest rates of infections
were among
people in their 20s who inject
drugs.
Fiat Chrysler is recalling more
than a million
Ram pickup trucks in the U.S. to
fix a software
glitch.
The automaker said the error
could prevent
side air bags and seat belts
from working
during a vehicle rollover.
The defect has been blamed for
at least one
death.
And stocks were mixed on Wall
Street today
after poor showings by
department stores and
Treasury yields.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost nearly
23 points to close at 20896.
The Nasdaq rose five points, and
the S&P 500
slipped three.
For the week, both the Dow and
the S&P 500
lost a fraction of a percent.
The Nasdaq rose a fraction of a
percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
former Secretary
of State Condoleezza Rice on
pivotal moments
in democracy's history, amid her
take on the
latest twists and turns out of
the Trump White
House; what tougher penalties
could mean for
crime rates, drug use and the
prison population;
Mark Shields and Ramesh Ponnuru
analyze this
tumultuous week of news; and a
musician coming
to terms with being
unconventional.
Now one-on-one with Condoleezza
Rice.
I sat down with the former
secretary of state
earlier today to discuss
President Trump's
abrupt firing of former FBI
Director James
Comey, the investigation into
Russia's meddling
in the U.S. election, and her
new book, "Democracy:
Stories From the Long Road to
Freedom."
Secretary Condoleezza Rice,
thank you very
much for talking with us.
CONDOLEEZZA RICE, Former U.S.
Secretary of
State: A pleasure to be with
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump,
as you know,
fired the FBI director, James
Comey, this
week.
You are someone who has served
at the highest
levels of government.
Do you believe what the
president did, at
the moment of the Russia
investigation going
on, crossed any ethical lines?
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Well, the
president obviously
had the authority to relieve the
FBI director.
Obviously, these are 10-year
terms because
it should be rare that that
happens.
But I really think, at this
point, we need
to settle down, step back and
let the investigation
move forward.
I have great confidence that
whoever is at
the FBI is going to find a group
of career
people who are dedicated to a
thorough investigation.
Senate Intelligence has all of
the tools that
it needs, all the information,
because, Judy,
I worry that this is starting to
erode people's
confidence in our institutions.
And we shouldn't have that
erosion, because
we have institutions that can
handle even
disruption of this kind.
But we need to find out what
happened.
It was a hostile act by a
foreign power.
We need to find out what
happened and let
the facts fall where they do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, the
president said the
investigation should go forward,
but he's
also called it a charade and
said that it
all stems from Democrats being
angry over
the outcome of the election.
So, he himself has undermined
what's going
on.
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Well, whatever
is said,
the investigation will go
forward, and it
will reveal whatever happened
there.
And so my view, and I think it's
probably
shared by a lot of my fellow
citizens, is,
could we get on with this and
really find
out what happened here?
You know, I look at Vladimir
Putin as somebody
who is an eye-for-an-eye kind of
person.
We questioned the legitimacy of
his election
in 2012, Secretary Clinton did
-- rightly,
by the way.
It did have -- it was quite
fraudulent.
And so I think he's saying now,
I'm going
to show you that I can do the
same thing.
And we shouldn't let him do
that.
We should have confidence in our
institutions,
let them get started, let them
get finished,
because we have a lot of other
work to do
on behalf of the American
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To get to the
bottom of this
is going to take time, is going
to take an
investigation.
This country needs to take
seriously what
President Putin has done and his
government
has done, shouldn't it?
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: We absolutely
need to take
it seriously.
As I said, it's a hostile act.
But there are ways to handle
even hostile
acts.
We say to the Russians, we know
you did it.
At a time of our choosing, we
will find a
way to punish that behavior.
But we do have confidence in our
institutions.
We are not Russia.
We have an executive that is
constrained.
We have a legislature that is
real.
We have a press that is free.
We have courts that are
independent.
This is not Russia.
And we don't have to allow him
to draw that
parallel.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Separate, but
related question,
the attorney general, Jeff
Sessions, had a
role in essentially signing off
on the decision
to fire the director of the FBI,
at a time
when the attorney general had
himself recused
himself from the Russia
investigation because
of things that had happened
before this.
You wrote a letter of
endorsement for the
attorney general.
Any concern about that?
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: I still have
the highest
regard for Jeff Sessions.
Look, I can't -- I don't think
any of us know
now what the course of events
actually as
it led to this.
There seems to be a lot of
confusion about
what came when from whom.
Let the White House speak to why
this unfolded
in the particular way, but I
have a lot of
confidence in Jeff Sessions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the same time,
in the middle
of all this, the president had a
meeting in
the Oval Office with the Russian
foreign minister,
Sergei Lavrov, with the Russian
ambassador
to the U.S., Sergey Kislyak.
What of this, again, at the same
time this
investigation is under way?
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Well, I don't
have a problem
with him meeting with the
Russian foreign
minister.
President Putin received
Secretary Tillerson
when he was in Moscow.
It would be reciprocal for the
president to
receive the foreign minister of
Russia when
he's in Washington.
We have important things to talk
to the Russians
about, despite their meddling in
our elections.
I hope they're talking about a
way to eventually
end this horrific humanitarian
crisis in Syria,
end that war.
The Russians have more leverage
than we do.
I hope they're talking about the
fact that,
if Kim Jong-un's long-range
missiles can reach
Alaska one day, they can also
reach Vladivostok.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what about
with the ambassador
to the U.S.?
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Well, the
ambassador is
going to always accompany the
foreign minister.
And so not everything is
abnormal in this
situation, and that seemed to be
perfectly
normal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The book.
You write with great passion
about how important
it is for the United States to
pursue democracy,
democratic values, freedom, as
it pursues
its foreign policy in the decade
to come.
Why was it important to you to
write this
book now?
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: I think, on
some level,
I have always wanted to write
this book, because
I think there is a kind of
mystery about democracy.
How do people come to trust
these abstract
institutions, the Constitution,
rule of law,
courts, elections, to carry out
their concerns,
rather than going to the
streets?
How does that happen?
And in the United States, you
know, I grew
up in Birmingham, Alabama.
We weren't full citizens.
My parents couldn't go to a
movie theater
with me.
My dad couldn't register to vote
in 1952.
And yet I remember very well --
and I relayed
it in the book -- standing as --
being in
the car with my uncle on the way
back from
school.
It was Election Day.
And George Wallace was about to
be elected
governor of Alabama.
And my 6-or-so-year-old self
knew that that
wasn't good for black people.
There were lines and lines of
black people
voting.
And I said to him, "So, this man
Wallace can't
win if all these people vote."
And he said, "No."
He said, "We are minority."
He said, "He will win."
I said, "Then why do they
bother?"
He said, "Because they know
that, one day,
that vote will matter."
And I have always seen people
around the world
doing that, and I think people
have this -- they
are attracted to it.
So, there is a moral case for
supporting people
who want the same benefits that
we have.
We are safer when we support
democratic development
as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You were a -- one
of the major
advocates for Rex Tillerson
being hired to
be the secretary of state.
And the president is proposing a
25 percent
cut in the budget of the State
Department.
Are you concerned?
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Well, I don't
think you
will see cuts of that magnitude.
Let's remember, the
administration proposes,
but it's the Congress that
authorizes and
appropriates.
And I think you're going to have
to see some
rebalancing, because diplomacy
is a very important
part of national security.
Now, there are some efficiencies
that the
State Department could achieve.
I think there's no doubt about
that.
And I think the numbers have
gone up a lot.
There seem to be many more
people.
So, maybe there are
efficiencies.
But when I look to the
department, I look,
first of all, at a Foreign
Service that is
already a bit stretched.
I remember Bob Gates once said
there are more
people in military bands than
foreign service
officers.
I also see programs that have
just redounded
to America's benefit abroad, for
instance,
the President's Emergency Plan
for AIDS Relief,
that showed our compassion and
saved the continent
from pandemic, the Millennium
Challenge, which
is a foreign assistance program
that is predicated
on the idea that you get foreign
assistance
only if you're governing wisely,
fighting
corruption.
Why wouldn't you want to help
countries like
that?
Look, we needed to raise the
defense budget,
but we need to be careful that
we keep our
diplomatic tools intact as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're
confident that the
things that you just described
are going to
survive?
(CROSSTALK)
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Well, I
certainly am going
to be out there arguing for
them.
And a lot of people are.
And, you know, in the book, I
try to explain
to people that democracy
promotion isn't all
that expensive.
When we think of it, one of the
regrets I
have about Iraq and Afghanistan,
and say this,
is that people have come to
think of that
as democracy promotion.
And that was so hard, and that
was the loss
of life and so expensive.
I would never have said to
President Bush,
use military force to bring
democracy to Iraq
or Afghanistan.
We had a security problem in
Iraq and Afghanistan.
We used military force to bring
down those
governments.
Then we had to have a view.
What comes after?
And we thought that it was
better to give
the Iraqi and Afghan people a
pathway to democracy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you're
describing things
that I don't hear this
administration talking
about.
They're talking about more
troops in Afghanistan
15 years after the U.S. first
went in.
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Yes.
Well, we may well need more
troops, but we're
also going to need -- you know,
we didn't
stabilize and win the hearts and
minds and
ultimately the stability of
Germany and Japan
with our military forces alone.
We defeated imperial Japan, and
we defeated
Nazi Germany, but it was the bet
on a democratic
Germany, on a democratic Japan
that they would
never again threaten their
neighbors, that's
what paid off.
And now they are firm pillars of
international
stability.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last question,
human rights.
Secretary Tillerson has spoken
out forcefully
just in the last few days about
how, in making
decisions about U.S. policy,
national security,
that human rights and American
values can't
be part of that conversation
right now.
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Well, I heard
a little bit
more nuanced speech from
Secretary Tillerson
on this.
I remember when I gave the
speech in Egypt
in 2005 saying Egypt had to
leave the world
for democracy and reform, and
people said,
well, then how can you talk to
Mubarak?
Well, you have to talk to the
Egyptian president
or the Turkish president.
You have to talk to people who
have bad human
rights records.
I had to sit with Moammar
Gadhafi, for goodness'
sakes.
Sometimes, policy, you do have
to deal with
people who don't share your
values.
But you are always better off to
remember
that your values and your
interests are linked
in the long run.
And that's how America has
prospered.
And the moral case is that we
are an idea.
And it can't be that liberty is
right for
us and not for them.
And so the language here will
matter.
I saw nuance in that speech, but
I do want
to hear the administration say
that America's
always going to stand for the
voiceless.
That is what has made us a great
power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And are you
hearing them say
that?
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: These are
early days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Condoleezza Rice,
thank you
very much, the book, "Democracy:
Stories From
the Long Road to Freedom."
Thank you.
CONDOLEEZZA RICE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
has long put
law and order at the top of his
White House
agenda.
But today's move to seek tougher
prison sentencing
policies marks the biggest
effort yet to dismantle
his predecessor's criminal
justice reform
legacy.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story.
JEFF SESSIONS, U.S. Attorney
General: I have
empowered our prosecutors to
charge and pursue
the most serious offense, as I
believe the
law requires, most serious
readily provable
offense.
It means that we are going to
meet our responsibility
to enforce the law with judgment
and fairness.
HARI SREENIVASAN: With that,
U.S. Attorney
General Jeff Sessions ordered
federal prosecutors
across the country to revive
some of the toughest
practices of the decades-old war
on drugs.
JEFF SESSIONS: I trust our
prosecutors in
the field to make good
judgments.
They deserve to be unhandcuffed
and not micromanaged
from Washington.
If you are a drug trafficker, we
will not
look the other way.
We will not be willfully blind
to your misconduct.
HARI SREENIVASAN: This memo
reverses Obama
administration policies that
aimed to lessen
the federal prison population by
not charging
low-level nonviolent drug
offenders with long
mandatory minimum sentences.
In 2013, then Attorney General
Eric Holder
told prosecutors to leave drug
quantities
out of charging documents to cut
down on unduly
harsh sentences that didn't --
quote -- "promote
public safety deterrence and
rehabilitation."
These directives coincided with
U.S. sentencing
commission changes and Obama
administration
clemency initiatives that
provided second
chances for low-level federal
drug offenders.
That led to a sharp decline in
the federal
prison population.
In 2013, the federal prison
population sat
at nearly 220,000.
Today, that number stands just
under 190,000.
In reaction to Sessions' memo
today, former
Attorney General Holder called
the move "dumb
on crime."
And Republican Senator Rand Paul
of Kentucky
said these new policies will
accentuate the
injustice of "unfairly
incarcerating a disproportionate
amount of minorities."
In March, President Trump
created a new national
commission to combat the opioid
crisis.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
Drug abuse has become a
crippling problem
throughout the United States.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Today,
Sessions listed the
opioid epidemic and a spike in
violence in
big cities as reasons for this
return to harsher
sentences.
JEFF SESSIONS: Drug trafficking
is an inherently
dangerous and violent business.
If you want to collect a drug
debt, you can't
file a lawsuit in court.
You collect it with the barrel
of a gun.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the memo,
Sessions does
leave discretion up to
prosecutors to avoid
unjust sentences, but those
exceptions would
need to be approved and
documented.
For more, we are joined by two
former directors
of the White House Office of
National Drug
Control, known more commonly as
the country's
drug czars.
Gil Kerlikowske served as
President Obama's
drug policy adviser from 2009 to
2014, before
becoming commissioner of Customs
and Border
Patrol.
He retired from that post in
January.
And John Walters served as drug
czar for all
eight years of George W. Bush's
presidency.
He is the chief operating
officer of the Hudson
Institute, a conservative think
tank.
Thank you both for joining us.
John Walters, let me start with
you.
Don't mandatory minimums
handcuff judges,
take away some of their
discretion, and
disproportionately
affect the poor and people of
color?
JOHN WALTERS, Hudson Institute:
Well, what
they do is, they target in the
federal level
more senior traffickers.
And they try to protect people
from this horrible
drug epidemic.
I think the issue is whether or
not we're
going to have equity across the
system.
Some of these were created for
two reasons,
one, to create equity across the
system for
serious offenses, so that some
people in some
places or shopping judges wasn't
a way to
avoid a fair and equal
punishment.
Two, the sentences were used to
create evidence
from individuals pending
conviction to help
break down whole drug
organizations.
They worked.
We need them now.
We have the most deadly drug
epidemic in the
history of the United States
under way.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gil
Kerlikowske, does this
dismantle in some ways some of
what you started
to accomplish as drug czar in
your administration
and perhaps slow the momentum
for what seems
to be a bipartisan approach and
understanding
towards criminal justice reform?
GIL KERLIKOWSKE, Former U.S.
Drug Policy Director:
Well, in some ways, it does, but
let's separate
the opioid epidemic.
When I took office in 2009, it
wasn't really
on the public's radar screen.
These are pills.
These are not being smuggled in
across the
country.
They're not being manufactured
in some garage.
This is driven by our medical
practices, which,
by the way, is governed at the
state level.
So try to separate out the
opioid issue.
The heroin issue is different,
although it
certainly is connected.
But if you're a trafficker, a
drug trafficker,
I couldn't agree more with what
the attorney
general said, because if you're
a drug trafficker
and you're indicted by the
federal government,
it's usually for a substantial
amount of drugs,
and so that's important.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gil
Kerlikowske, I also
want to ask, does this -- what
about the argument
that Jeff Sessions makes that
says that this
takes the handcuffs off of
prosecutors?
Prosecutors have been
complaining for some
time that they can't use a large
sentence
as leverage to get the type of
information
that they need.
GIL KERLIKOWSKE: Well, the large
sentence
can be helpful.
But, remember, too, there are
finite resources
in the Department of Justice.
There are finite jail space
availability in
the federal government.
And so reserving those spaces
and reserving
those prosecutors for the most
serious crimes
is very important.
I spent almost eight years in
the administration,
all but four months.
I met with a number of U.S.
attorneys and
assistant U.S. attorneys.
I didn't hear them complaining
about the way
they were being dealt with by
what's fondly
called main justice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: John Walters,
I want to
ask, you mentioned the heroin
epidemic, and
Gil also seconded that.
What about going after the
distribution and
the manufacture?
I mean, I have to show I.D. to
get a bottle
of NyQuil over the counter, yet
a town in
West Virginia of a population of
800 can get
300,000 pills shipped to it over
a few years.
JOHN WALTERS: Yes, I think the
enforcement
of the diversion of drugs, pill
mills and
other kinds of diversion of
synthetic opioids
are important.
But, today, that was what was
happening in
five, six years ago.
Today, the death rate is driven
by criminally
produced synthetic fentanyl and
heroin.
And this is killing more people
every year
than all the names on the
Vietnam Veterans
Memorial.
Secretary of HHS Price mentioned
that.
In addition, that number is
accelerating.
What happened is, we have lost
control of
these organizations, and we need
to be able
to enforce the law.
You yourself have had the author
of "Dreamland"
on this program, the story of
the pills and
heroin coming together to create
this carnage.
He notes that some of these
gangs were parking
outside drug treatment centers
to give free
samples of heroin to people to
readdict them
or to keep them from getting
into treatment.
Those people need to go to jail.
We need to assign a much larger
effort.
We need to stop talking about
there is limited
resources in the federal system
and the state
system.
We need to bring together public
health efforts
to bring people into treatment
and we need
to stop the flow of this poison.
It is killing more Americans
than all gun
and automobile accidents
combined.
And it's accelerating.
And, in addition to that,
cocaine production
out of Colombia is going back to
the old track
days.
We are in the midst of facing a
perfect storm,
and we're not on top of it.
We need law enforcement to work,
as we need
treatment to work.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gil
Kerlikowske, he's pointing
to the inflow of drugs from
outside.
The president has proposed a
border wall.
You were the head of Border and
Customs.
Will a border wall work to stop
what he's
describing?
GIL KERLIKOWSKE: Well, one, the
border wall
certainly won't work, because
when we talk
about heroin and fentanyl -- and
let's be
clear -- 17,000 people perished
as a result
of the pills in the United
States.
That's considerably more than
the heroin coming
into the United States.
But heroin and fentanyl, a very
powerful painkiller,
come in between -- or at our
ports of entry.
People carry it on their
persons.
People try to conceal it in
vehicles.
If you wanted to slow that down,
you would
actually not worry so much about
a wall.
You would actually give more
resources, drug-sniffing
dogs, technology at our ports of
entry, not
between our ports.
HARI SREENIVASAN: John Walters,
I want to
give you a chance to respond.
JOHN WALTERS: Yes, I think,
look, fentanyl
is a change, and it's now the
driving forces
in many of these deaths.
But the vast majority of the
drugs killings
Americans are coming from
overseas.
The vast majority of those are
coming over
the Mexican border.
The vast majority of those walk
within six
feet of a uniformed border
agent.
This is a significant and
dramatic failure
of intelligence and operations.
We need the cooperation of the
Mexicans.
We need to do a better job.
The deaths in this country are
going to approach
100,000 a year pretty soon, and
it's already
staggering.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gil
Kerlikowske, John Walters,
thank you both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now back to
the dominant
story of the week, the FBI
director's firing
and the fallout from it, with
the analysis
of Shields and Ramesh Ponnuru.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
National Review senior editor
Ramesh Ponnuru.
David Brooks is away.
And welcome, gentlemen.
Welcome to both of you.
So, Mark, any question that the
president
was within his authority to fire
James Comey?
MARK SHIELDS: No.
It was within his authority,
Judy.
But this wasn't amateur hour.
This was an incomprehensibly
incompetent,
inept amateur week, beginning
and ending with
the president.
Other people came out with eggs
of all sorts
on their faces.
Everybody associated with them
is diminished,
sullied, stained in some way.
But this was Donald Trump's
total miscalculation.
The man who made a national
reputation by
saying "You're fired" didn't
have the decency
to call the FBI director in
person, and publicly
humiliated him and embarrassed
him by severing
him, announcing it on cable
television as
he was speaking to FBI
colleagues in Los Angeles.
And he has thus insured that
this will be,
with this Russian investigation,
is now a
permanent part of our political
landscape.
It will affect and influence and
be an outline
of the 2018 election, and
perhaps even beyond.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Total
miscalculation, Ramesh?
RAMESH PONNURU: The
administration combined
two of its hallmarks, reacting
to these events
with disorganized dishonesty.
They began by saying that the
firing was a
response to the FBI director's
handling of
the Clinton e-mail story and the
analysis
of that handling by the deputy
attorney general,
Rod Rosenstein.
But, by the end of the week,
President Trump
himself was saying it really
wasn't about
those things.
He had made his decision before
the memo,
and the decision was really
motivated by the
fact that Comey wasn't shutting
down the Russia
investigation, the investigation
into the
administration and the
campaign's ties to
Russia, and thus exploded
everything that
people had been saying in the
administration's
defense earlier in the week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so, Mark,
they have given
several different explanations
over the course
of a few days.
What do you believe was behind
this?
MARK SHIELDS: Donald Trump.
Judy, think about this.
Robert Mueller was the
predecessor at the
FBI before James Comey.
He was there from 2001 to 2013
under President
George W. Bush and President
Barack Obama.
I don't know how often they had
dinner or
how often they met privately.
But can you imagine Robert
Mueller being asked
by George W. Bush or Barack
Obama, not once,
not twice, but three times, am I
the subject
of a criminal investigation by
your department,
by your agency?
It's unthinkable.
And this is -- obviously, he
wants this to
go away.
He, the president, wants this
whole investigation
to go away.
And he has guaranteed -- he has
guaranteed
the following.
James Comey was enormously
popular among the
FBI workers.
He was somebody who was
thoughtful and supportive
of his employees and colleagues.
And they liked him.
And he was would take one for a
team.
He was willing to take criticism
for the FBI,
and in spite of the decision he
made on Hillary
Clinton and the handling of
that, which a
lot of people disagreed it.
He's guaranteed, Donald Trump
has, that everybody
associated with the FBI is going
to make one
more call, follow up on one more
lead, and
work one hour harder every day
on the pursuit
of this case.
It's not going to go away.
He has guaranteed that it's
going to be more
pursued even more arduously,
intently, passionately,
and professionally by the
bureau.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you see
as a fallout,
Ramesh?
RAMESH PONNURU: Well, I think
that this may
be the beginning of an effort by
the administration
to push a lot of congressional
Republicans
somewhere they don't want to go.
The prevailing line from
Republicans, even
those who are well-disposed
towards President
Trump, has been, of course the
FBI and of
course the congressional
Intelligence Committee
investigations need to continue.
What is coming out of Trump
world right now
is, no, these investigations are
an attempt
to cast doubt on the legitimacy
of Trump's
presidency.
It's a taxpayer-funded charade.
If you believe that, these
things need to
end.
Is that something that
congressional Republicans
are really going to accept?
That's not something that I
think they're
going to want to try to sell to
the American
people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you see
Congress moving
on this?
MARK SHIELDS: I think Congress
is under tremendous
pressure now.
The committees have to perform,
because any
foot-dragging on this at this
point, at any
point, the administration, the
White House
will be seen as somehow hiding
something,
that there is something here to
hide.
I mean, the president boasting
that, three
times, you exculpated me in the
letter that
says I'm firing you, I think it
puts pressure
there.
I think it guarantees that any
appropriations
by an investigating agency will
be fast-lined
and will be available.
Nobody wants to be seen on that
other side.
Judy, there are 241 Republican
House seats
right now.
In 2018, they're all on the
ballot; 175 of
those members of the 241 have
never run for
reelection with a Republican
president in
the White House.
They're used to being on the
offensive in
midterm elections, running
against -- or for
repeal Obamacare, or against the
administration.
They're going to have to decide,
and a lot
of them.
They're looking right now at
losing three
dozen House seats, by historical
standards.
They have to decide right now,
are they going
to establish daylight and
independence from
this toxic administration?
This administration this week
was so absolutely
misleading, dishonest in its
handling of this,
that the White House right now
at this point
doesn't even believe its own
leaks.
It is that bad.
It's really reached that point.
So, if you are a Republican, you
cannot be
seen on the side of trying to
slow this down,
cover it up, hide things.
RAMESH PONNURU: You do have to
wonder whether
the Senate is capable of
confirming anybody
to the FBI director position.
If that person doesn't have a
demonstrated
record of independence and
integrity, I think
it's going to be very hard for
them to get
the requisite votes.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: You think Rudy
Giuliani is a
good choice at this point?
(LAUGHTER)
RAMESH PONNURU: There is a
narrow Senate margin.
And I think you are going to be
not looking
for political figures.
MARK SHIELDS: Absolutely.
RAMESH PONNURU: I think you're
going to be
looking for people like Judge
Silberman, people
like Michael Chertoff, people
who are respected
across the aisle.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ramesh, what
about Mark's larger
point here that this is really a
turning point
for this administration, a
turning point in
terms of how Congress sees the
administration?
We don't know yet about the
public.
We haven't seen any public
opinion polls yet,
significant ones.
But what about the Congress?
RAMESH PONNURU: Well, look, I do
think that
this story right now is a topic
of consuming
interest in Washington, D.C.
I don't know that it is in the
country at
large.
But I do think this is running
the risk of
isolating this president
politically.
There's a reason why
congressional Republicans
have not felt it was in their
interest to
just say, these investigations
are all legitimate.
There's a reason why the
administration's
first instinct was to come up
with a pretext
for dismissing Comey and not tie
it to the
Russia investigation.
And so I think it's going to be
really hard
for them to sustain this,
particularly when
you consider that President
Trump remains
somebody who, for this early in
his presidency,
is pretty unpopular.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean because
now it's out
in the open that the rationale
was the Russia
investigation?
RAMESH PONNURU: That's right,
and because
Trump seems inclined to want to
push this
argument further, and he seems
to want his
surrogates to be making this
argument.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mark, have we
learned something
new about the president in all
of this?
Is this the coming together of
everything
that we already believed?
I mean, how do you see this
moment?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, you see that
the president
thinks and acts in very short
time frames.
Judy, if you wanted to get rid
of the FBI
director, there is an
established way of doing
these things.
You get a mutual friend to go to
him and say,
the president wants your
resignation, and
we will do it on your terms, and
we will exchange
letters, and there will be a
Rose Garden ceremony,
and we will introduce your
successor, and
you will leave with a great
tribute and great
-- and it's not Donald Trump.
Either he's scared, or anxious
or whatever,
but he had to do it in a hurry.
And he did it in his way.
He did it to the point where
he's totally
discredited, if not disabled,
his own press
secretary.
And he's totally discredited or
partially
discredited Mike Pence, his vice
president,
who his reputation is based on
his earnestness
and his decency, not on his
great imagination
or great vision, but he's a
solid guy.
He is a guy you can trust.
He got caught in a total lie,
pretending that
Rod Rosenstein, two weeks on the
job as deputy
attorney general, somehow
barreled into the
White House and said, take this,
Mr. President,
you have got to do it.
Now think about Rod Rosenstein.
What does he do?
He is a man who has earned a
reputation, a
deserved reputation, bipartisan
respect as
being a straight shooter.
He's been used as a pawn in this
thing.
He was advanced as the reason,
when he knew
he wasn't the reason.
And now he's got to prove his
independence,
if he's going to be in charge of
this investigation.
So, he's not going to be -- no
pressure can
be applied to him.
If it appears to be, again, it's
going to
be redound to the detriment of
the White House
and the president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I have seen some
analysis this
week, Ramesh, that people are
watching moderate
Republicans, especially in the
Senate, to
see how they react.
What is their calculus?
What do they look for as they
decide how to
respond to this and what to do?
RAMESH PONNURU: Well, I think
that they are
going to be nervous.
They're not going to want to go
out on a limb
and defend the administration,
particularly
when the line for the
administration keeps
changing.
And you go out on the limb, the
administration
might saw that limb out right
from behind
you.
The political pressures on them
are going
to be intense.
They're going to want to look
for ways to
get out from those political
pressures.
And it could be that the end
result of this
is that it has strengthened the
case for a
special prosecutor, an
independent commission
or a select committee of
Congress.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Mark said --
I want to
ask you about -- I think, Mark,
you said,
what, three -- you think three
dozen Republican...
MARK SHIELDS: House seats that
right now...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: ... are in
jeopardy.
MARK SHIELDS: Historically,
presidents under
50 -- this president is going to
be under
40 percent favorable.
Just Ramesh's point is, I think,
a very good
one that bears -- it bears
reflection on,
that the idea, Judy, that The
Wall Street
Journal editorial page leads its
endorsement
of firing Comey by quoting, the
president
had reacted to the deputy
attorney general's
initiative in doing it.
So, they're supporting Donald
Trump, and they
have got egg all over there.
They have got a poultry farm on
their face.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: I mean, let's be
honest about
it.
And to be -- have him say, have
-- how about
being accused of being a
showboat by Donald
Trump?
Now, that is tantamount to being
called ugly
by a frog.
I mean, Donald Trump has never
been a shrinking
violet before.
I didn't know grandstanding was
a mortal sin
in his lexicon.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you look
for in the
days to come to see where this
goes, Ramesh?
RAMESH PONNURU: I think I would
start looking
for the congressional Republican
reactions.
I don't think that a lot of
people today have
been very vocal in response to
President Trump's
tweeting about tapes of...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, by the way,
we don't know
whether there is a recording
system in the
White House.
RAMESH PONNURU: Right.
But I think -- but the question
is, do they
just try to ride this out, or do
they start
criticizing the president?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I think, Judy, I
think that
it's going to be every man and
woman for him
or her self, and they're going
to realize
that their fate, fortune and
future is not
going to be well-served being
tied to this
president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, a week that
won't be
forgotten anytime soon.
Mark Shields, Ramesh Ponnuru,
thank you.
Next: another in our occasional
series My
Music, giving artists a chance
to talk about
their work.
Tonight, singer-songwriter
Alynda Segarra
of the band Hurray for the Riff
Raff.
She performed recently at
Washington, D.C.'s
9:30 Club.
Segarra was just 17 years old
when she left
her home in the Bronx in what
she said was
a search for American music.
Now 30, she's returned to her
roots in New
York with a new album exploring
her Puerto
Rican heritage.
ALYNDA SEGARRA, Hurray for the
Riff Raff:
The people who have gotten me
through my life
are the weirdoes and the poets,
the rebellious
women and the activists.
are the weirdoes and the poets,
the rebellious
women and the activists.
They were considered the
riffraff by people
in power, and they're the ones
that make history.
I am Alynda Segarra , the lead
singer of Hurray
for the Riff Raff.
My path was really
unconventional.
I knew I was doing bad in
school.
And I dropped out, and I ended
up running
away.
And it was really hard on my
family.
And I traveled by hitchhiking
with friends
and riding freight trains,
because Woody Guthrie
rode freight trains, and playing
music on
the street in New Orleans,
because I needed
to do something to make money.
The new album, "The Navigator,"
is about a
young girl growing up in a very
big city.
And she is based off of me, but
she's a little
bit more of a superhero than I
am.
It's me realizing what I lost
when I ran away
from home, realizing what shame
did to me,
and really trying to get in
touch with what
it means to be a Puerto Rican
woman, what
that means musically.
My path of running away, I look
back on it
now, and I'm like, I could have
been killed.
And a lot of the journey was me
realizing
that there were odds stacked
against me, and
deciding to be OK with not being
rich, saying,
OK, I will make music.
I will play in coffee shops.
I will play in houses.
I will play in these tiny places
that only
10 people will come.
I'm going to do it because I
believe in art
and I believe in what I'm doing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Great music.
And, online, we want you to take
a look around,
all the way around, a massive
landfill outside
New Delhi, India.
Explore our 360 video that let's
you adjust
your view to see how one of the
world's fastest
growing economies is dealing
with an overwhelming
trash problem.
You can find that and more at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
And different subject
altogether.
Robert Costa is gearing up for
"Washington
Week" this evening.
Robert, what's on tap?
ROBERT COSTA: Judy, tonight,
we're going to
delve behind the scenes of
President Trump's
explosive decision to fire FBI
Director James
Comey.
Our roundtable of reporters,
they will have
the latest on why this story
continues to
reverberate around Washington
and how it may
impact ongoing investigation
into Russia's
meddling in last year's
election.
That's coming up on "Washington
Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
And we will be watching.
And tomorrow on "PBS NewsHour
Weekend": continuing
coverage of the reactions to
President Trump's
decision to fire FBI James
Comey, plus how
a small African nation became a
prized location
for military bases.
NARRATOR: The week after the
(INAUDIBLE) visit,
a ceremony at Camp Lemonnier
illustrated just
how many other nations have a
military presence
Djibouti.
France, Italy and Japan have
bases here.
Now add China to the list.
To protect its economic interest
in the region,
China is building its first
overseas military
base here, on track to be
completed this year.
That's a Chinese navy frigate in
Djibouti's
harbor.
The Chinese base will be just
seven miles
north of where the Americans
are.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow
on "PBS NewsHour
Weekend."
And we will be back right here
on Monday.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and we will see you
soon.